# Why China's exports will keep on rising

China's trade surplus could increase further despite wars and tariffs

Ding Lei, a purchasing manager at a chip-trading company in Shenzhen, is having a good year. Among other kinds of semiconductors, his company is selling IGBTs, a type of transistor used to regulate electrical power. Customers include motorbike makers in Spain, manufacturers in Romania and clients across South-East Asia. His optimism about sales prospects is understandable. In the first three months of 2026, China's exports of transistors jumped by 26% in dollar terms compared with the same period of 2025.

This time last year, after Donald Trump introduced "liberation day" tariffs on friends and foes, the levy on Chinese goods leapt to 145% for a time. (After a ruling by America's Supreme Court in February, tariffs have fallen back to 10% across the board, at least for now.) Many assumed that China's trade would slump. But by the end of 2025 it had defied all expectations. China racked up a record $1.2trn trade surplus and its exports rose to $3.8trn. In the first three months of 2026 exports continued their stellar streak, increasing by 14.7% compared with the same period last year.

To understand China's standout performance, The Economist has scraped and analysed millions of lines of trade data, each describing exports of a particular product to a specific country in an individual month. Our findings help to explain how the country's exports stayed resilient in the face of its escalating trade war with America. They also shed light on the future trajectory of its trade surplus, which, despite trade wars and real wars, could rise further still.

Even before the tariff shocks of Mr Trump's second term, China's exports were undergoing fundamental changes. America's importance as a market had already dwindled. It took 17% of Chinese exports in 2014 but 14.7% a decade later, partly as a result of trade salvoes fired during Mr Trump's first term. More important, exports were steadily moving up the value chain. Though China still makes up a big chunk of global exports for goods such as footwear and clothing, its dominance has waned. It is gaining ground in car production, in which its share of global exports jumped from 4.5% to 11.4% between 2014 and 2024, and is securing its advantage in electronics, where its share rose from 20.7% to 26.1%.

The Atlas of Economic Complexity, a research project run by Harvard University, scores goods based on how hard they are to make. In the decade from 2014, our calculations using these scores show that the average "complexity" of China's exports edged up from 0.29 to 0.36—intriguingly America's fell from 0.06 to -0.15. (Zero is the average complexity of all goods.)

As a result of the Trumpian turmoil, China's exports to America decreased by over $100bn in 2025 (a 20% decline from 2024). But exports to other countries increased by around $300bn, more than enough to offset that loss. And many of the countries that imported much more from China last year also exported a lot more to America. Vietnam is the most striking example, having imported $36bn more goods from the one and exported $57bn more to the other.

One question is how much of this new trade pattern is simply a rerouting of more familiar corridors: exports that would once have flowed directly from China to America may now be passing through third countries such as Vietnam. To produce an estimate, The Economist has matched what countries imported from China with what they exported to America using detailed product codes. Our methodology cannot show that these are actually the same goods, merely that they are of the same kind. It therefore conflates transshipment, namely the illegal changing of export origins in order to skirt tariffs, with trade diversion, where countries sell one set of goods to America and replace them with similar Chinese imports.

Our calculations show that Chinese exports are finding genuine new markets, not just new routes to America. The numbers suggest that perhaps $33bn of additional Chinese exports arrived in America through third countries between April and December of 2025. That explains only 11% of the $300bn increase in exports to countries other than America. But clearly the rest of the world wanted more Chinese items, too. American demand cannot explain away the bulk of China's export boom over the past year.

What can account for it? Once the world's factory, China is now becoming a "factory to the factories", concludes the McKinsey Global Institute, a think-tank linked to the consultancy. Exports of intermediate goods (used in the making of other goods) and capital goods (tools and machinery) grew by 10.2% in 2025, compared with export growth of 5.5% overall and a sharp 4.6% decline in exports of consumption goods. China sold electronic components—chips, batteries, and smartphone parts—to the likes of Vietnam, India and Thailand.

Some of the forces driving China's exports should remain strong. The AI boom "supercharged" exports at the start of this year, believes Yuxiao Zhang of Macquarie, a bank. From January to March China sold $46bn-worth of memory chips abroad, an increase of 174% year on year, which made the chips its biggest export item. The global buildout of data centres used to train AI models has driven up demand for these semiconductors, as well as other electronic parts that China makes in abundance. Power generation (which is tied to the AI boom) may be another area to watch.

Chinese exports remain fiercely competitive on price. Though the yuan has appreciated by about 6% against the dollar over the past 12 months, it remains cheap when adjusted for inflation and weighted by trade. China's "real" exchange rate has weakened by about 15% since the beginning of 2022, according to the IMF, partly because factory-gate prices fell for 41 months straight (a decline that finally ended in March). The competitiveness bestowed by deflation is at the core of China's export boom, says Andrew Batson of Gavekal Dragonomics, a consultancy.

New difficulties face China's exporters. For one, the countries that have been absorbing Chinese goods may not be happy to continue doing so. In 2025 China ran a $291bn trade surplus with the European Union, a 120% increase from 2020 (not adjusted for inflation). So far resistance has been limited: the EU imposed tariffs on Chinese electric cars in 2024 and a few South-East Asian countries have put levies on Chinese steel. More measures may follow.

Then there is the war in Iran. China's exports to Gulf countries plummeted by 52% year on year in March (though the region is a relatively small market, accounting for just 3.8% of China's exports in 2025). High oil prices will hurt many countries, depressing their demand for foreign goods. The conflict has also forced China to restrict exports of refined fuel to try to ease any shortages at home.

But China's export machine is better placed to weather these problems than rival manufacturers in Asia. The bulk of the country's power generation comes from coal, mined at home. As a result, Chinese firms face less of a cost squeeze from energy than companies elsewhere. The war also seems to have started a boom in electric-vehicle sales in countries like Japan, South Korea and India. That could be good news for China's dominant EV-makers.

The other enduring source of strength for China's exports is the country's stubborn domestic weaknesses. Chinese goods are competitive abroad because there is inadequate demand for them at home, which makes them cheap. That same weak demand depresses imports, contributing to a large trade surplus. This unbalanced trade will probably help China to hit its growth target of 4.5-5% for 2026 (last year net exports of goods and services accounted for 1.6 percentage points of its 5% growth). The risk is that the government may then no longer feel the need for much fiscal stimulus this year. The chronic weakness of China's domestic demand has made its export boom possible; it also makes it necessary. ■
