# Six books to understand the atomic bomb

From blinding light to imagined ruin

The use of the newly invented atomic bomb at the end of the second world war changed geopolitics, physics, the nature of the American presidency, the human condition and the likelihood of the end of the world. These six books go some way to describing what happened, how it happened and what it meant.

Hiroshima. By John Hersey. Knopf; 208 pages; $16. Important Books; 122 pages; £6.95

The August 31st 1946 issue of the New Yorker devoted its editorial pages to a single article. The first paragraph situates six of Hiroshima's inhabitants in space—at a desk, on a porch, by a window, on a cot, opening a door, walking down a hospital corridor—and in time—at the moment the bomb's "tremendous flash of light cut across the sky [like] a sheet of sun". The remaining 30,000 words record how those four men and two women came to apprehend both the scope of the horror and its terrible particularities in the minutes, hours and days that followed. In doing so it tells the story of how 100,000 others died. The unornamented recording of specific lives provides almost no military or political context. Instead it mixes the mundane with the harrowing: melted eyes, shadows etched into walls. Its publication was a sensation. Extracts appeared in newspapers; radio stations read it unabridged. In book form it was an instant bestseller. It brought the reality of what had happened home to Americans in a way nothing had done before, or has since.

The Making of the Atomic Bomb. By Richard Rhodes. Simon & Schuster; 896 pages; $25 and £16.99

The Manhattan Project was a sprawling, expensive endeavour with a single goal: to create an atomic bomb. Scientists applied insights from the frontiers of physics to a continent-spanning industrial effort. The author begins this Pulitzer-prizewinning book on the subject by narrating the developments in atomic physics during the 1920s and 1930s, and profiling its practitioners—Niels Bohr is a particularly memorable subject. As the war begins, and these physicists take on roles they might never have imagined, the pace picks up and the scope expands to take in generals, mechanics, politicians, pilots and diplomats. The story resolves into the terrible climax of the Trinity bomb test and, finally, the attacks on Japan.

It is a masterpiece, and complete in itself. But "Critical Assembly: Poems of the Manhattan Project", by John Canaday, is a fine accompaniment, refracting the insights and experiences of many of those involved through a single poetic sensibility.

The Most Awful Responsibility: Truman and the Secret Struggle for Control of the Atomic Age. By Alex Wellerstein. HarperCollins; 432 pages; $32 and £25

The author is a historian of both science and nuclear policy. His recently published account of Harry Truman's relationship with the atomic bomb is thoroughly researched, grippingly told and startling. Learning of the Manhattan Project only after acceding to the presidency, just three months before the Trinity test, Truman never made a specific decision to use the bomb. No such decision was needed; its use was part of the logic of its creation. But Truman's acceptance of responsibility made it appear as though a decision had been taken. In retrospect, he seemed to come to believe this himself, and worked to ensure that a clear presidential decision had to be central to any future use. That belief, and the apparatus of launch codes and "footballs" that later grew up around it, engendered a new consolidation of national-security decision-making. A provocative account of what that centralisation has meant for the power of the presidency more broadly can be found in "Bomb Power" by Gary Wills.

By The Bomb's Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn of the Atomic Age. By Paul Boyer. University of North Carolina Press; 464 pages; $29.99 and £37

To some, it marked the final fall of man; to others, it showed the hand of a providential God. American reactions to their country's use of nuclear weapons were as various as Americans themselves. The author's book surveys this range, from the belief that world government was the only defence against certain death to a millenarian faith that new powers of creation would eclipse the possibilities of destruction. Arthur Compton, one of the overseers of the Manhattan Project, spoke of nuclear science forging a new partnership with God, one in which humans would share "with Him the great task of making life what they wanted it to be."

Boyer's account can be usefully supplemented by "War Stars: The Superweapon and the American Imagination" by H. Bruce Franklin. As Boyer makes clear, the mainstream literary response to the bomb was "tentative and muted"; Franklin traces how popular science-fiction responded full-throatedly—and, indeed, how it foreshadowed the bomb, imagining superweapons of all sorts for generations before physicists, many of them science-fiction readers, actually delivered one.

A Canticle for Leibowitz. By Walter M. Miller Jr. Random House Worlds; 368 pages; $9.99. Little, Brown Book Group; 336 pages; £10.99

Images of a future in which the present is known only from its ruins date back to the 19th century. The nuclear age reminted their epic irony as a way of confronting the magnitude of a world-historical change without staring directly at the blinding bomb itself. Charlton Heston, confronting the half-buried Statue of Liberty at the end of "Planet of the Apes", offers the most visceral example. The novel "A Canticle for Leibowitz" is among the richest. A monastic order in the deserts of America's south-west is devoted to the relics of a 20th-century physicist; over centuries, tensions between the preservation, rediscovery and re-enactment of technology and its tragedies play out, their resolution all but inevitable. Neville Shute's "On the Beach" made the end of the world believable; Kurt Vonnegut's "Cat's Cradle" turned it into bleak, unruly satire. Miller made it into Roman Catholic myth.

100 Suns. By Michael Light. Knopf; 208 pages; $138. Vintage Publishing; 208 pages; £40

Some have the simplicity of dawn—just a light rising on a horizon. Others have the lurid, surreal complexity of a self-consuming spherical flame. There is extraordinary power in the 100 images from government archives of nuclear-test photographs that Michael Light, an American photographer, assembled for this spectacular, evocative, all but wordless book. Some images are abstracted, the heads and stalks of mushrooms set in inky blackness. In others context is provided by landscapes and observers. As clouds are created and torn asunder above them, humans sit in the foreground—at times arrayed as an attentive audience, at others almost oblivious as they chat and move on. They bow their heads as if in supplication. They turn their backs, as if in fear or shame. ■
