# Partner, scapegoat or spoiler? Israel's place in a fragile ceasefire

The dealmaking between America and Iran is happening without Binyamin Netanyahu

For an hour after Donald Trump and Iran's leaders announced a two-week ceasefire on April 7th, warning sirens continued to blare across Israeli cities as Iranian missiles kept flying. It was a stark reminder for Israelis that after 40 days of ferocious air strikes their government had still not achieved one of its main aims, set out when the war began, of eradicating that aerial threat. Israelis overwhelmingly supported the war, seeing Iran as an existential threat. But if this is how it ends, many will question whether it was worth it.

Iran's ballistic-missile arsenal had not been eliminated, as Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel's prime minister, promised. Despite thousands of Israeli and American air strikes, it was still able to launch dozens of missiles and drones at Israel and the Gulf countries every day. Israel's assessments early in the war that it had "neutralised" over three-quarters of Iran's missile-launchers look like exaggerations; half is more plausible, but even that includes some that can be restored to working order fairly easily.

Neither have Israel's other war aims been realised. America and Israel bombed nuclear-research centres but Iran still has over 400kg of enriched uranium, presumably hidden underground. And Mr Netanyahu's most cherished desire, to topple the Iranian regime, looks further off than it did before the conflict started. It may indeed fall at some point. But for now, despite losing dozens of its most senior figures in aerial assassinations, it looks entrenched.

Worse still for the Israeli prime minister, his partner, America's president, is now dealing with Iran's leaders directly. Israel was aware that talks were going on but was not a party to them. Until Mr Trump updated Mr Netanyahu shortly before his announcement of the ceasefire, the Israeli air force was preparing to send its warplanes to attack Iran's energy infrastructure, helping to carry out the American president's threat to destroy Iran's "whole civilisation". Instead, the pilots were stood down.

On an immediate tactical and military level, however, Israel can point to considerable achievements. Iran has lost much of its (admittedly puny) air force and its navy. Its air-defence network is in ruins. Considerable damage has been done to its arms industries. Israel did not lose a single warplane during the thousands of sorties it carried out in Iranian airspace. At home, its missile-defence systems intercepted the vast majority of the more than 600 missiles fired by Iran towards Israel. Only around 20 Israelis were killed, far fewer than suggested by most threat assessments for a war of such scale.

From Mr Netanyahu's perspective the war was also a strategic win in one critical respect: Israel and America worked together in an unprecedented partnership. The two countries launched a war together against a shared enemy; their planners co-ordinated targets; and American and Israeli pilots flew on joint missions.

Yet the manner in which the ceasefire came about, brokered by Pakistan between America and Iran, with Israel shut out, made clear the nature of the relationship: that of superpower and client state. That will only be reinforced in the weeks to come. Israel will not be part of the negotiations that are due to start in Islamabad on April 10th, in which America and Iran will try to thrash out a some sort of permanent agreement. Israel's future security is at the mercy of Mr Trump's whims.

Worse still for Mr Netanyahu, he could yet be transformed from partner to scapegoat. He convinced Mr Trump to launch their war on February 28th with the assassination of Iran's supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, and of dozens of other senior regime figures. On April 7th the New York Times quoted senior American officials, including the vice-president, secretary of state and head of the cia, the spy agency, who expressed their reservations about Mr Netanyahu's plans before the war. Such leaks, as the war may be ending, could be a sign that many in Mr Trump's administration now want to distance themselves from Israel's leader. They are acutely aware that Israel has become deeply unpopular among American voters. A survey conducted in late March by Pew, a research outfit, found that 60% of Americans now have an unfavourable view of Israel, a rise of seven percentage points from last year. Mr Trump personally still seems closely aligned with the prime minister, but their partnership could well be tested.

In a terse early-morning statement Mr Netanyahu said that Israel "supports President Trump's decision to suspend strikes against Iran for two weeks". He emphasised that it was, for Israel, merely a suspension of hostilities. He also stressed that the ceasefire does not include Lebanon, where Israel has been fighting Hizbullah, a militia backed by Iran that began launching missiles at Israel on the second day of the war. Although it has so far refrained from striking Iran during the ceasefire, the Israeli air force attacked around 100 Hizbullah strongholds in Lebanon soon after it began.

Mr Netanyahu's statement contradicts Iran's insistence that the ceasefire cover all fronts, including those involving its proxies. Iran has warned that if Israel continues to strike Hizbullah, it will also resume its attacks. Mr Trump will have to rule on this soon. If he forces Israel to suspend its campaign in Lebanon, too, it could signal the beginnings of a rift.

Mr Netanyahu would happily be the spoiler of the ceasefire, but above all he wants to avoid any open discord with the president, who has spoken of arriving in Israel in two weeks' time as the guest of honour on its independence day. Israel will be holding an election by the end of October; the prime minister's friendship with Mr Trump is a big electoral asset in Israel, one of the few countries where he is popular.

To win the election Mr Netanyahu must convince Israelis both that he and Mr Trump are still partners and that Israel has won its wars in Iran and Lebanon. Yet Mr Trump seems intent on ending the war, even though the Iranian regime remains in place and retains its ability to strike Israel with missiles and drones. It may even retain its nuclear material, although American officials insist it will not. Even a political conjurer as talented as Mr Netanyahu will struggle to turn that into a triumph. ■
