# Did Israel overestimate the damage to Iran's missile programme?

Iran shows no sign of running out

Just before sundown on April 1st, with barely an hour to go before the seven-day Jewish festival of Passover began in Israel, sirens once again wailed across the country's central cities, warning of incoming rockets from Iran. The Iranians launched at least ten missiles simultaneously, their largest salvo in four weeks, as Israelis were gathering for their Seder meal. Over 20 were launched in total, most of which were intercepted by the Israel Defence Forces (idf). Only a few people were injured, mostly from shrapnel. But few Israelis expected Iran's arsenal of missiles to have lasted this long.

Only the evening before, Binyamin Netanyahu, Israel's prime minister, had insisted that Israel was "suffocating" the Iranian regime, promising that it was "weaker than ever". Israelis could be forgiven for some scepticism. In June 2025, at the end of the 12-day war between Israel and Iran, Mr Netanyahu said that Israel had achieved "a historic victory that will stand for generations" against the "existential threats" of Iran's nuclear- and ballistic-missiles programmes. Shortly after that war ended, Israel's intelligence services were already reporting that Iran had renewed its production of missiles at pace. Nine months later, including more than a month of ferocious strikes on Iran, Israelis are still scurrying for shelter from Iranian missiles.

Iran launched around 80 missiles towards Israel on the first day of the war. The daily tally has gone down significantly, but since the fourth day of the war, and despite relentless Israeli and American air strikes, Iran has kept up a steady rate of fire of between ten and 20 missiles a day, mostly single missiles or salvoes of two. Israel's interception rate remains high and casualties and damage have been fairly limited. But Iran shows no sign of running out of missiles or launchers.

Analysts in Israel and Western countries have various explanations for the resilience of Iran's missile forces. First, Israeli and American intelligence services have repeatedly both underestimated the number of missiles Iran has produced over the years and exaggerated the numbers they claimed to have destroyed, both in the war last June and in the first weeks of the current conflict.

Second, and no less crucially, Iran seems to have more launchers than outsiders believed, many of them disguised as civilian trucks. These have been dispersed throughout Iran, a country about the same size as Germany, France, Spain and Britain combined. Some missiles have been refitted with lighter warheads, including some with cluster bomblets. These inflict less damage if they get through air defences and score a direct hit, but they can be fired from greater distance in Iran's eastern provinces. Israel and America have less coverage and their aircraft cannot loiter for as long in the east which makes it harder for them to quickly locate and destroy the launchers.

Israel has been claiming for weeks that it has "neutralised" at least three-quarters of Iran's missile launchers. But according to recent American intelligence assessments half are still intact. And Israel's tally included launchers that were in underground "missile cities" to which Israeli and American warplanes had bombed the entrances. Iran seems to have been prepared for this and has quickly cleared the cavern entrances, allowing the launchers out.

The launchers are most vulnerable when they are in the open, preparing to launch, and immediately after firing. The heat-flash gives away their location to satellites and roaming fighter-jets and drones. Cloudy weather conditions have given them some shelter and have also hidden Iranian teams working to open up the "missile cities." That could explain the launch surge in recent days.

Destroying Iran's missile programme, which began in the mid-1980s, when Iraq's Soviet-supplied Scud missiles pounded Iranian cities, was always going to be extremely difficult. For over four decades, Iran invested billions of dollars not only in developing and manufacturing an array of missiles of increasing ranges, a fleet of launchers and a subterranean network of missile warehouses, but also in supplying missiles and expertise about producing them to the militias it sponsors throughout the region.

This enabled groups like Hizbullah in Lebanon, Hamas in Gaza and the Houthis in Yemen to build up significant missile arsenals of their own. Hizbullah has joined Iran in firing on Israel in this war. Most of its large missile stores were destroyed by Israel in late 2024, but the idf believes it still has over 10,000 short-range weapons capable of hitting targets up to 45km away, and a few hundred mid-range missiles with a range up to 200km. These were also probably used, at Iran's bidding, to fire at a British airbase in Cyprus. So far the Houthis have only fired a handful of missiles at Israel in this war but the Israelis believe they have many in reserve.

Despite failing to stem the continuing stream of missiles, Israeli officials believe that, alongside the Americans, they have critically damaged Iran's ability to resume missile production once the war is over. Hundreds of strikes have targeted not only missile factories, but also research centres, and sites that produce rocket engines, electronics and even steel plants which, they claim, supply materials for the missile programme. This time they believe it will take Iran years and many billions of dollars to rebuild its missile arsenal.

idf officers are also quick to point out that even if the Iranians are still firing, their original plans to try to overwhelm Israel's missile-defence systems with repeated massive salvoes of hundreds of missiles have come to nought. When they laid out scenarios for this war, the idf presented the Israeli cabinet with terrifying possibilities of widespread destruction in major cities and hundreds, perhaps thousands, of casualties. Iran no longer has enough missiles for such an assault and the number of missiles that have made it through the missile-defence screen is fairly small, causing so far only around 20 deaths in Israel and the occupied West Bank.

"Iran's missile project was built to deter other nations from attacking it, like Iraq did," says Tal Inbar, an Israeli researcher and missile expert. "In that sense it failed. But it has succeeded in other ways."

Israel's original war-plans were prepared late last year and focused on trying to destroy as much of the missile project as possible. Originally they planned to attack in the summer. But widespread protests in Iran in December and January spurred Donald Trump to promise protesters that help was "on the way". He and Mr Netanyahu launched a much more ambitious war, aimed at triggering the collapse of the regime.

The regime, though badly battered, is showing no signs of collapsing. And it is still able to hit numerous targets in Israel and in the Gulf states. Israeli analysts now believe that whenever a ceasefire is announced, Iran will still be capable of launching missiles. Its capacity to do so will play a central role in the regime's post-war victory narrative and its ability to project power and menace its neighbours. ■
