# America and Iran start a high-stakes negotiation to end their war

Their best hope may be an interim deal that buys time for more talks

The stakes could scarcely be higher. If the talks now under way between America and Iran are a success, they could reshape a relationship defined by almost half a century of hostility. If they fail, potential casualties include the global economy, J.D. Vance’s presidential aspirations and the Iranian negotiators themselves. Yet the likeliest outcome may be something less dramatic: a deal that staves off a renewed Gulf war and buys time for further talks.

Mere days have passed since Donald Trump threatened to destroy “a whole civilisation” in Iran. On Tuesday the Middle East seemed perched on the abyss. Even after Mr Trump announced a two-week ceasefire, Iranian missiles and drones continued to rain on Gulf states.

But on Friday evening Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf, the speaker of Iran’s parliament, stepped off his plane at a military airfield in Islamabad, Pakistan’s capital. In a symbol of mourning he and the rest of his delegation were dressed all in black. There to greet them, clad in military fatigues, was Asim Munir, Pakistan’s powerful army chief, who played a central role in getting both sides to a ceasefire. The general switched to a business suit the next morning to greet Mr Vance, the American vice-president (pictured). By afternoon both sides were ensconced in the Serena hotel, where they met for two hours initially. The talks may continue into Sunday.

There had been some concern that they would not happen at all. Since the ceasefire was announced, Iran has insisted that it had preconditions for meeting the Americans. On Wednesday it said that the two-week truce must also include a halt to Israel’s war in Lebanon. On Friday evening, with Mr Vance already in the air, Iran added another demand: that America release billions of dollars of Iranian oil revenue frozen in foreign banks because of sanctions.

The Iranians claim that America agreed to both terms. America says it refused the latter, and that it only told Israel to limit its attacks in Lebanon, not to halt them altogether (indeed, Israel continues to bomb south Lebanon). Such brinkmanship was expected, though. It was not the first time the Iranians demanded concessions merely to show up for talks.

Despite the drama, both sides look serious about making an effort. For the Iranians, the presence of Mr Vance is encouraging. They insisted on dealing with him rather than Steve Witkoff, Mr Trump’s diplomatic envoy, after earlier negotiations with Mr Witkoff were twice followed by American and Israeli strikes. They see Mr Vance as more motivated to reach a deal. He is a self-professed sceptic of wars in the Middle East, including this one, and a presidential hopeful in 2028. Success in Islamabad would boost his chances; failure would harm them.

For their part, the Iranians sent a substantial team. It includes Ali Bagheri Kani, a former nuclear negotiator, and Abdolnasser Hemmati, the central-bank governor, who will figure in any discussion of sanctions. More importantly, this is the first time in 37 years that Iran can negotiate without the spectre of Ali Khamenei looming in Tehran.

The late ayatollah was famously averse to two things: talking to Americans and making decisions. He preferred that his emissaries avoid direct discussions and instead pass messages via intermediaries. He also gave them little freedom to commit to anything. With Khamenei gone, the Iranians have more latitude to meet the Americans face to face and, perhaps, to make decisions on the spot.

They will need it. When world powers negotiated a nuclear deal with Iran in the 2010s, it took two years; the American team flew across the Atlantic 69 times for talks. The agreement being discussed today is far more expansive. Negotiators want to address Iran’s missile programme and its support for regional militias; the Strait of Hormuz; and Iran’s demands for reparations and comprehensive sanctions relief, among other issues. It is unimaginable that such a deal could be concluded in two weeks.

Yet each side has an incentive to act quickly. Mr Trump desperately needs to get ships moving through Hormuz to ease pressure in energy markets, as higher prices fuel voter discontent. Though futures markets are still oddly sanguine—a barrel of Brent crude for delivery in June fell to $94 this week—the physical oil market is showing strain. The spot price for some grades of crude approached $150 a barrel at the height of the crisis and remains above benchmark prices. Petrol prices in America are at their highest level since 2022, which helped push annual inflation to 3.3% in March, up from 2.4% a month earlier.

Iran may act as if time is on its side, but that is bravado. Its economy was spiralling even before the war, with inflation near 50% and a currency that had become all but worthless. Now America and Israel have bombed everything from steel mills and petrochemical plants to bridges, railways and passenger jets. Thousands of firms may have to lay off workers. Iran desperately needs cash to deal with the consequences; otherwise it risks renewed unrest.

That suggests the possible outline of an interim deal. Iran would commit to allow a certain number of ships through Hormuz, and to refrain from charging them extortionate fees. America would provide limited sanctions relief, such as allowing Iran to tap $6bn in frozen assets held in Qatar. Such an outcome may sound underwhelming, but it would address the most pressing needs on each side and build a modicum of trust. It would also buy time for further negotiations (the two-week ceasefire can be extended by mutual agreement)—and it could easily be reversed should the talks fall apart.

Yet it would also make some regional countries nervous. A temporary deal would leave Iran with a measure of control over Hormuz. It would defer other pressing issues, such as Iran’s stockpile of more than 400kg of uranium enriched to near-weapons-grade. Diplomats in several Arab states fear it will come to resemble the ceasefire that ended Israel’s war in Gaza, which halted the worst fighting but left the complicated issues for future negotiations. Six months later, those negotiations have yet to begin. ■