# A lasting Lebanese peace still looks a long way off

Donald Trump has enforced a ceasefire, but that is just a start

Israeli and Lebanese citizens first learned of the ceasefire on April 16th from a social-media post by Donald Trump. The American president had promised that a telephone call would take place between the leaders of the two countries. It did not, but Mr Trump was undeterred. He made clear to Binyamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, that the war which began on March 2nd was now over, or at least paused for ten days. It was time, he wrote, for "Israel and Lebanon to achieve a Lasting peace".

Few on either side believe that is a realistic prospect. But as the ceasefire went into effect at midnight, celebratory gunfire peppered the Beirut sky. Over 2,000 Lebanese were killed in the war and around a million displaced by the Israeli air strikes. As news of the truce spread, thousands packed into their cars for a desperate journey south, hoping to find their homes still standing. Many displaced from the south are unable to return because the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) controls a 10km "security zone" and the ceasefire does not require its withdrawal.

The response in Israel was more muted. This war began when Hizbullah, the Iranian-backed Shia militia, launched missiles at the country to avenge the killing of its patron, Iran's supreme leader Ali Khamenei, in the opening salvoes of America's and Israel's bombardment of Iran. Israel responded with devastating air strikes and by sending troops into Lebanon. Israel's leaders, both political and military, saw this as a chance to strike a fatal blow against Hizbullah. Some 46 days later, Hizbullah, though weakened, was still fighting. It was launching rockets against Israeli towns until minutes before the ceasefire began. Later its fighters took to the streets of Beirut's battered southern suburbs in a show of force.

More worrying from Israel's perspective is that it has failed to decouple its war in Lebanon from the talks between America and Iran. Israeli officials believe that pressure from Mr Trump to accept the ceasefire was largely a result of demands from the Iranian regime, which has always insisted that Lebanon be part of any peace deal. Iran's leaders have succeeded in ensuring that their Lebanese proxy survives to fight another day. "It's clear Trump is fed up with the war in Iran and doesn't want to jeopardise the ceasefire there," says an Israeli diplomat. "He's now also imposing a ceasefire in Lebanon to appease the Iranians."

Mr Netanyahu, who waited just over two hours after Mr Trump's post to issue a statement, praised the damage Israel had inflicted on Hizbullah and insisted the IDF would not leave its security zone in Lebanon. Israeli residents near the border, unconvinced that this will mean lasting peace, were enraged. "The fact that the president of the United States is the one announcing the ceasefire," said David Azulay, council leader of Metula, Israel's northernmost town, "just shows how detached the prime minister of Israel is." He accused Mr Netanyahu of failing to protect Israel's citizens.

The truce requires Lebanon's government to take meaningful steps to disarm Hizbullah and open "good-faith negotiations" on a border agreement with Israel. Lebanon's leaders sound determined to take on Hizbullah, and are under growing pressure to do so. But the fear is that the Lebanese armed forces have neither the military capability nor the political consensus behind them to do so. The government could not even enforce its own decision to eject Iran's ambassador.

Mr Trump announced that Mr Netanyahu and Joseph Aoun, the Lebanese president, would soon arrive in Washington for talks. In reality, neither leader is likely to risk wrath at home by appearing together. In the meantime, the situation on the ground will probably remain largely unchanged. Israel has already levelled many Shia villages in the area it controls, claiming they were used by Hizbullah to launch attacks. Hizbullah and the IDF are hunkering down in their positions. The Lebanese government may have agreed to the ceasefire but it is not yet able to control events on the ground in the south.

This is the fifth ceasefire Mr Trump has imposed on Israel—two in Gaza and two in Iran, in June last year and earlier this month. He has proved that, unlike his predecessor Joe Biden, he can force Mr Netanyahu to pause Israeli attacks. But he has been less successful in ensuring that any kind of lasting peace follows those initial deals.

The first ceasefire in Gaza broke down within weeks. The second remains in force, but Israeli air strikes continue. Israel still controls over half of Gaza's territory while Hamas, the Palestinian Islamist movement, continues to rule more than 2m Gazans crowded in the remaining, devastated territory. Six months after the ceasefire, talks about disarming Hamas and beginning Gaza's desperately needed reconstruction have gone nowhere.

Lebanon now faces a similar stalemate, with Hizbullah intact, Israel remaining in its buffer zone in the south and displaced Lebanese unable to return home. Mr Trump, as long as he is determined to reach a deal with Iran, will continue to enforce the ceasefire. But the "Lasting peace" he promised still looks a long way off. ■
