# An environmentalist, a landowner and a libertarian walk into a barn

How a pipeline tangled political alliances in Iowa

Ask a farmer in Iowa about their land and many will delight in sharing how long it has been in their family. "You don't understand if you haven't grown up on a farm," says Sherri Webb, whose 40 acres in Shelby County will next be inherited by a seventh generation. "When you're raised that way, to cherish the land and to take care of it, it just sticks with you." Her property is farmed for corn and beans by a tenant chosen by her grandmother.

Now Ms Webb is caught up in a fight to stop a carbon-capture pipeline from running through it. The company that wants to build it is Summit Carbon Solutions, which was founded in Iowa by an agricultural business giant and Republican mega-donor. The proposed route, more than 2,000 miles long, would collect and pipe carbon dioxide from ethanol plants through Iowa, Nebraska, Minnesota and South Dakota, ending in North Dakota for underground storage (see map). Supporters say the pipeline will create jobs for construction workers and help ethanol producers sell more fuel to low-carbon markets, in turn helping corn farmers.

In 2024 Iowa's utilities commission granted Summit a permit, giving it the right to use eminent domain—which allows the government to take private land for public use—to build the pipeline if the route has been approved in other states. The project qualifies for carbon-capture tax credits, which were expanded during Joe Biden's administration. These were extended by Donald Trump's One Big Beautiful Bill Act to also include credits for enhanced oil recovery, a process that involves retrieving oil out of dry wells using carbon dioxide. Summit has said the project could serve as a "critical CO2 supply artery" for American oil basins, including North Dakota's Bakken field.

Some landowners and ethanol plants have agreed to the pipeline. But a band of Republican rebels see it as a land grab. The result is a muddled alliance against the project between liberal environmentalists, rural landowners and conservative Republicans. In Iowa supporters of the cause include Steve King, a controversial former Republican congressman known for making nativist remarks, and Bobby Kaufmann, the leader of Iowa's House of Representatives and a former adviser to Mr Trump's 2024 campaign in the state.

"When we're fighting oil pipelines it's really hard to get certain members of the Republican Party on board," says Emma Schmit of Bold Alliance, an environmental group that protested against the Dakota Access Pipeline. Republicans tend to support big oil projects, seeing them as essential to energy security. But some are less sure of the benefits of a pipe carrying carbon dioxide. Many landowners say they are worried about safety, often citing a separate case in Mississippi in which residents were poisoned after a carbon-capture pipeline ruptured. Summit says there have been no fatalities from such projects.

"Trump says the whole green thing's a hoax, I don't argue with him," says Steve Kenkel, the Republican former supervisor of Shelby County, of the tax credits. He alleges the president has kept them "because these people are in his pocket pretty deep". His farm, which has been in his family for more than 140 years, is a mile outside the impacted route. But he believes that people should have the right to say no to the project. In protest he recently stopped selling grain to an ethanol plant that has said it would work with Summit.

The ruckus could shape the state's primary elections in June. Last year Kim Reynolds, the governor, who is not seeking re-election, vetoed a bill aiming to restrict the use of private land for similar pipelines. Candidates vying to replace her discuss property rights on the campaign trail.

Missteps on the issue have already cost Republicans elsewhere along the pipeline's route. In South Dakota several moderate lawmakers were replaced by radical newcomers who campaigned on a property-rights platform in 2024. The state has since banned eminent domain for carbon-capture pipelines, a potential roadblock to the project. In nearby North Dakota a judge has revoked Summit's underground-storage permit for now.

In the meantime landowners of varying political stripes are lobbying lawmakers to take up an amended bill at Iowa's state Capitol each week. On a recent frosty morning dozens showed up in red shirts with slogans including "We the people of Iowa are pissed off". One sign asked, "What topples without eminent domain protections?" Close by, a line of several large dominoes etched with phrases that included "liberty" and "the american dream" were knocked down. ■
