# Will California's next governor be a fighter or a fixer?

Candidates with buzzy national profiles are leading those with local records

Antonio Villaraigosa lost the room with one sentence. The former mayor of Los Angeles, along with five other candidates who hope to be California's next governor, were recently trading barbs on a stage in Fresno. "You're never going to get elected," Mr Villaraigosa told his two Republican opponents, "because at the end of the day, it is a blue state." A chorus of groans and scoffs echoed through the place (conservatives are plentiful in this part of California). But Mr Villaraigosa's comment has already proved prescient.

In California, the top two finishers in June's primary will advance to the general election regardless of party. Gavin Newsom, the state's current governor, is term-limited, and the eight leading Democrats jockeying to replace him have splintered the vote. Party leaders have been panicking (and journalists have been salivating) over the possibility that two Republicans could progress. But President Donald Trump, of all people, has put California's Democrats out of their misery and made a truth-teller out of Mr Villaraigosa. On April 5th he endorsed Steve Hilton, a Briton and former Fox News host who used to advise David Cameron. If Mr Hilton consolidates Republican support as expected, he will face a Democrat come November—and he will almost certainly lose.

But which Democrat? Nearly every governor of California since 1942 had previously won a statewide campaign. The only exceptions to the rule were Hollywood heroes Ronald Reagan and Arnold Schwarzenegger. Yet this pattern seems to be breaking down. The three Democrats polling highest boast national partisan profiles built around criticising Mr Trump. The candidates with experience running big cities or working in Sacramento, the state capital, are languishing. The divide among Democrats in this race is not really between moderates and progressives, but between fighters and fixers.

First consider the fighters. Tom Steyer is a billionaire hedge-fund founder and climate activist who ran for president in 2020. He has already spent more than $112m of his own money on his campaign. Then there is Eric Swalwell, who has served for more than a decade in the House of Representatives, where he helped manage Mr Trump's second impeachment. His 2020 presidential campaign lasted for three months, making it even shorter than Mr Steyer's brief run. He annoys Mr Trump so much that the FBI may soon release files from an old investigation into his association with a suspected Chinese spy (Mr Swalwell was not accused of wrongdoing).

Also among the fighters is Katie Porter, a former congresswoman who tried and failed to win a Senate seat in 2024. At a second town hall on the same day in Fresno, most candidates introduced themselves in (sometimes limited) Spanish to the many Hispanic workers and labour leaders who were in attendance. Ms Porter abstained from doing so except to call Mr Trump "a racist pendejo" (idiot).

Some of California's power brokers doubt that House members have what it takes to fix things. "I am of the opinion that congressional people know nothing about running the state, and I'm right," says Willie Brown, a former statehouse speaker and former mayor of San Francisco. But there is a reason why the focus on Mr Trump resonates. Some Democrats are concerned about the state's standing as a counterweight to the Trump administration. When Rusty Hicks, the chair of California's Democratic Party, was still worried about two Republicans advancing to the general election, he said that the biggest thing at stake in such a scenario "is California's leadership on the world stage".

California has plenty of home-grown problems, however. Recent polling suggests that roughly half of likely voters think their state is on the wrong track. Enter, the fixers. "I think most people intuitively understand that we can't just blame Donald Trump for all of our problems," says Matt Mahan, the mayor of San Jose, California's third-largest city. "We have to take ownership of our policy failures." Mr Villaraigosa, now 73, led the state assembly before he was mayor of LA, but he has been out of office for more than a decade. His two runs for governor reveal how politics in California has changed. In 2018 the state's kingmakers chose Mr Newsom instead, recalls Mr Brown. "He was really upset with us." This time round, the state party no longer seems able, or willing, to make decisions in smoke-filled rooms.

About 30% of Democrats say they don't know who they are voting for. "People still ask me if I'm running against Gavin Newsom," says Mr Mahan, who hopes to win over undecided voters. Part of voters' malaise may stem from the governor's ubiquity. Mr Newsom himself reckons that his redistricting campaign last year deprived the race of attention. After eight years, some Californians are ready to move on. In Fresno, Ms Porter approvingly mentioned Mr Newsom's expansion of free community college. Someone in the audience blurted out: "He's on book tour." ■
