# Sir Demis Hassabis wants to automate drug design

We speak to the boss of Google DeepMind

Sir Demis Hassabis has long had an ambitious plan: to develop artificial-intelligence models capable of curing all diseases. His journey towards realising it has been a circuitous one—few career advisers would recommend teaching a machine to play Atari games as a good first step—but his successes are hard to dispute. As the boss of Google DeepMind, a world-leading AI lab, he shared the Nobel prize for chemistry in 2024 for designing AI models that could predict how proteins fold. Nearly two years on, how close to his dearest goal does he think he is?

Speaking to The Economist’s “Inside Tech”, a video show, Sir Demis says work is proceeding according to plan. Five years ago Google spun off Isomorphic Labs (with Sir Demis as its boss), an AI-powered pharmaceutical firm, with a remit to use DeepMind’s protein-structure tech, AlphaFold, to find novel medicines. After a few years of tooling up, the lab is about to announce its first candidates. Sir Demis says it has 19 programmes spread across three main research areas: cancers, cardiovascular conditions and immunology.

Those programmes, which include partnerships with big pharma companies including Eli Lilly, Novartis and Johnson & Johnson, as well as internal projects, are intended as the first step towards a generic technology that could tackle any medical condition thrown at it. Once the underlying technologies are developed, says Sir Demis, “Like with AlphaFold, you can apply them extremely quickly”. AlphaFold itself took six years of work to predict its first protein structure, and then one year to follow up with what he describes as the structures of “all 200m proteins known to science”. He hopes a similar speedup will happen inside Isomorphic.

The company is benefiting from advance access to DeepMind’s work. In February Isomorphic announced that it was working with a new, proprietary version of AlphaFold—the first to be reserved for internal use. IsoDDE, as it is called, can be used to predict various properties of potential drugs, including their binding affinity—a measure of how strongly they link to proteins and a proxy for their eventual efficacy. At that particular task, according to Isomorphic’s published results, it outshines state-of-the-art open-source alternatives like Boltz-2, developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

IsoDDE covers more ground than AlphaFold, says Sir Demis, as it is able to predict the biochemical interactions of proteins in a way that its predecessor was not designed to do. It is such predictions that will differentiate a commercially valuable “drug design engine”—the “DDE” in the name—from an academic tool. But it isn’t just the pursuit of profit that has kept the model behind closed doors. “There are trade-offs in terms of biosecurity and biosafety. If you just make that freely available, if a bad actor were to get hold of it, they could repurpose it for harmful ends.”

He is not alone amongst his peers in unilaterally decreeing what powers humanity can be trusted with. This week Anthropic, another AI lab, said that its latest model, Claude Mythos, would only be accessible to cybersecurity experts, citing the hacking risk a public release could create. Yet it would be fair to ask Sir Demis—who are you to make that call?

“People have to make their own decisions about the lab leaders,” he says. “There’s a lot of information out there now about each of the leaders’ different approaches...You also need to think about people’s motivations, and why they got into AI.” His own motivation? To create “the ultimate tool for science”. To hear him tell it, power and riches are just an unfortunate side product of being a humble scientist working towards his Nobel prize. ■
