# A wary rapprochement between India and China

New Indian investment rules are a cautious start

Less than six years ago Indian and Chinese soldiers fought each other with sticks in a high-altitude brawl. The scrap was among a series of border clashes in 2020 and 2021 that killed dozens and put relations between the two countries into the deep freeze. In the past year, however, they have been thawing. Last summer India's prime minister, Narendra Modi, paid his first visit to China since the border trouble. Direct flights resumed in October. On March 27th the countries' commerce ministers, Piyush Goyal and Wang Wentao, met to discuss trade.

Several factors have eased normalisation. Indian manufacturers rely on Chinese inputs and know-how. Delhi teems with hawkish national-security types and businessmen fond of protectionism, but there is growing recognition of the need for pragmatism towards China—even if the ultimate goal is to reduce India's dependence on it. China, for its part, does not want to aid India's rise, but nor does it want fractious relations at a time when it has much else to worry about. At a meeting last year China's vice-president, Han Zheng, said the two Asian giants should perform a "dragon-elephant tango", an improbable metaphor for harmonious and mutually beneficial relations.

Yet in many ways the footwork remains clumsy. Take India's approach to Chinese investment. Although the flow of Chinese goods into India has continued to rise in the past five years, flows of capital have dried up. That is because a policy India introduced in 2020 gave Indian officials full discretion to block Chinese investment proposals. Last month the Indian government announced two changes: companies with less than 10% Chinese beneficial ownership will be able to bypass onerous checks; and decisions on projects in several critical sectors, such as capital goods, electronic components and inputs to solar-power projects, will have to be made within 60 days.

The Indian government says it hopes this will boost foreign direct investment overall and several Indian commentators heralded a "strategic shift". That is wishful thinking. For one thing, the opening is no more than partial. Shivshankar Menon, a former ambassador to Beijing, says the new rules still leave much to discretion, and it is not clear that blocked investments will now be cleared. The Chinese firms most likely to take the risk of investing in India are large ones with cutting-edge technology. They may be put off by a 10% ownership cap. Santosh Pai, a lawyer at Dentons Link Legal in Delhi who advises on cross-border deals, says the rules are drafted vaguely, and the definitions of terms such as "capital goods" lack clarity.

Also, after years of frosty relations, trust is low. Indian officials and bosses feel the victims of Chinese bullying, as, for example, when the government blocked the export of critical goods like fertiliser and tunnel-boring machines, or Chinese engineers working in Indian iPhone assembly plants were recalled. Would-be Chinese investors have been put off the Indian market by seeing their peers ensnared in tax cases. A plan by byd, China's biggest electric-vehicle manufacturer, to invest in an Indian venture came to nought; Ant Group, a Chinese fintech giant, sold its stake in an Indian company last year. Chinese analysts are sceptical that the new rules will make much difference.

Another obstacle to a harmonious dance is that both sides want to call the tune. For India that means closing a trade deficit that is now more than $100bn annually. (At his meeting with Mr Wang Mr Goyal again raised the issue of access to the Chinese market for Indian pharmaceuticals.) Crucially, India also wants investment in its manufacturing base that will allow it to benefit from Chinese expertise in areas like green tech. China might like to increase its influence in India, but does not want to transfer technology. An article by Liu Zongyi, a Chinese foreign-policy scholar, has warned that under India's new rules it will be easy for Indian companies to acquire technology and then push out Chinese investors.

Since Chinese investors have other places to go, the onus is largely on India to find ways to resolve these tensions. But it seems unsure how to go about it, perhaps because it still understands its big neighbour poorly. Donald Trump's caprices make that more of a problem. Mr Modi's trip to China came weeks after the American president slapped extortionate tariffs on India. Mr Trump's war in Iran and the consequent energy shock have reinforced Indian doubts about America as a partner—and made the diversification of the populous nation's energy supply more urgent. Some in Delhi see last month's tentative move towards China as a first step. Expect the awkward tango to continue. ■
