# Can countries grow richer by exporting people, not goods?

That depends where those people end up

Most of the oil in Kerala is pressed from coconuts. Yet the southern Indian state, famed for idyllic backwaters, fragrant cuisine and an easy-going lifestyle, owes much of its prosperity to barrels of the foul-smelling crude that comes bubbling out of the ground in the Persian Gulf and, normally, is shipped through the Strait of Hormuz. Ever since the Middle East oil boom began half a century ago Keralites have been heading there to work, first as cleaners and construction workers, then as clerks, nurses and salespeople. An estimated 1.7m of them live in the Gulf, equal to 5% of the state's population and close to 11% of its workforce.

Gulf oil money has transformed Kerala. K.P. Kannan and K.S. Hari of the Centre for Development Studies, an Indian think-tank, calculate that by the mid-2010s remittances from the region were equivalent to about a quarter of the state's output, and more than both its value added in manufacturing and its public spending. This has lifted living standards. Consumption per person is nearly three-quarters above the Indian average. Multidimensional poverty, an Indian measure of destitution, afflicts around one in ten Indians but is virtually absent in Kerala.

Some economists argue that growing rich by industrialising and exporting industry's products is harder nowadays than when Europe, Japan, South Korea and, most recently, China pulled it off. For countries like India, seizing a greater export market for manufactured wares in a world already awash with them requires shoving someone else out of the way. When that someone else is China, good luck with that. Could exporting people rather than goods, as Kerala does, provide an alternative path to prosperity?

Many poor places rely on emigrants. The World Bank estimates that remittances they send back home account for over a fifth of national income in Honduras, Lebanon, Nepal and Tajikistan. In low- and middle-income countries as a whole, they make up a third of all capital inflows. In Nepal they may have cut poverty rates by 40% between 2001 and 2011. In Mexico they have reduced infant mortality. Remittances' effect on economic growth, however, is less clear-cut. One study in 2013 of African, Asian and Latin American migrant-sending countries found that a permanent 10% increase in remittances per citizen was associated with a rise of 0.13% in GDP per person. More recent research from 2022 suggested an only slightly less modest effect of 0.66%.

In a new paper Charles Kenny of the Centre for Global Development, a think-tank in Washington, finds virtually no relationship between the size of a country's diaspora and its growth in GDP per person. Emigration can, after all, be both the result of weak growth, which pushes people to leave in the first place, and the cause of economic acceleration. Mr Kenny still believes emigrants can, in some circumstances, be an economic stimulant. Everything depends on the nature of emigration's spillover effects. These can be positive if they raise average human capital in the sending country and this is harnessed domestically. They can also perpetuate the very problems that lead people to leave.

A recent study in the Journal of Economic Perspectives, by Gaurav Khanna of the University of California, San Diego, examines the waves of Asian migration to America. Some of these, Mr Khanna argues, have facilitated "brain circulation" rather than "brain drain". Lots of Indians, for example, have earned software-engineering degrees in the hope of seizing lucrative opportunities in Silicon Valley. Some won the migration lottery and headed to San Francisco but many more stayed behind. That created a new export industry, able to be delivered not only in person, through migration, but remotely from places like Bangalore, in Karnataka state. India's IT exports are now worth more than $220bn annually, more than the $135bn the country earns in total from remittances.

In Kerala, by contrast, the spillovers look meagre. The state bests the rest of India on literacy and longevity, thanks to a legacy of enlightened princely rule before independence and leftist governments' heavy public spending on education and health afterwards. But would-be investors are put off by those same governments' anti-capitalist economic policies and the state's overweening trade unions. As with IT workers elsewhere in India, Kerala has plenty of health professionals who did not manage to emigrate, but many nurses are on strike demanding higher wages. Businesses struggle to match wage expectations hoisted high by labour-market links to deep-pocketed employers in the Gulf.

As a result, companies prefer to set up shop in business-friendlier places like Tamil Nadu next door. Much of Kerala's remittance windfall is spent on building houses and buying cars, which raises living standards but not productivity. Paying for children's education, which Gulf money also bankrolls, does make Keralites more productive. So long as local opportunities to harness that productivity remain scarce, however, the brightest graduates will continue to try their luck abroad.

Perhaps the biggest drawback of emigration-led growth is that its success rests on factors beyond the sending country's control. This is true, to a degree, of any economic activity. But it is easier for manufacturers facing tariffs in one market to find a new one than it is for emigrants to move somewhere else when economic or political circumstances in their temporary home change.

Again consider Kerala. The number of Keralites in the Gulf has plateaued in recent years as countries there reserve certain jobs for citizens. Their remittances could decline by 20% this year as the knock-on effects of the Iran war hurt the region's economies. Emigration nearly always benefits emigrants and their families back home. Banking on it for broader growth amid rising fragmentation, protectionism and conflict is perilous. ■
