# Has the World Bank performed a U-turn on industrial policy?

Interventionism, revisited

Since 1980 the World Bank and the IMF have stuck to a plan. When countries on the brink of financial collapse come to them, the institutions extend fresh loans and coax creditors to take haircuts in return for liberal reforms. In 1993 a report from the bank titled "East Asian Miracle" grudgingly admitted that the growth of Japan and South Korea in preceding decades may have been aided by governments' illiberal picking of industrial winners. But that was largely a matter of luck. For other countries, the report declared, "The promotion of specific industries holds little promise." The "Washington Consensus" of free markets, sober fiscal policies and private enterprise would carry the day.

This makes the bank's latest research tome all the more arresting. "Industrial Policy for Development", released in March, is a guide for governments determined to intervene in the economy. Ana Margarida Fernandes, who leads a group researching development, and Tristan Reed, one of her economists, cover whether, when and how poor countries might use tools from public spending to tariffs and exchange-rate management to boost industry.

Long-time critics of the Washington Consensus have greeted the volume as a 275-page surrender. Jake Sullivan, architect of Joe Biden's hands-on industrial policy, crowed that its significance was "hard to overstate". Yet on a close read, many ideas buried in the dense text look familiar. What has changed most is the tone.

The label "industrial policy" was once reserved for big ideas such as import substitution, where states ban trade with foreign countries to nurture domestic industries until they are strong enough to compete on an equal footing. Over the past decade, however, the list of policies counted as intervention has lengthened. The bank distinguishes two main categories.

One concerns "market incentives". Ms Fernandes and Mr Reed treat these cautiously. India and Brazil may get some benefits from offering startups subsidies that offset the lower quality of home-grown knowledge and universities. But these are likely to be expensive. Given the high chance of startup failure, they also need a large market with lots of candidate firms if they are to have any effect. Other tools are even less useful. Restricting imports and paying firms to produce components locally excludes countries from global value chains. Offering consumers subsidies does little to make firms more competitive. Tariffs promote some industries at the expense of others, which must pay more for their inputs.

The report is less averse to the second category, "public inputs". It encourages policymakers to increase public spending on things like electricity, water supply and transport, for instance lauding Ethiopia for increasing the cargo capacity of its national airline to encourage horticulture exports. It supports the creation of industrial parks where such infrastructure is readily available, as Morocco and Costa Rica have done. And it backs training initiatives such as a government scheme in Romania which produced workers that eventually attracted firms. All sensible. None of it particularly statist.

Or novel. The report from 1993 offered similar advice. It warned that import substitution was too risky, as cosseted domestic firms tend to fail when exposed to international competition and that warping the economy to benefit handpicked industries risked starving the rest. Instead, countries could try to boost exports by attracting foreign investment and increasing infrastructure spending. Indeed, in the past three decades much of the bank's loans have financed bridges, roads and railways.

Ms Fernandes and Mr Reed acknowledge that poor countries have changed since 1993 in ways that make them less vulnerable to industrial-policy disaster, notably keeping inflation and budget deficits under control. The authors are also less reflexively dismissive of statist tools, and give them serious consideration. But apart from public inputs, few get an explicit thumbs-up.

Instead, the report's most important innovation, besides going easy on finger-wagging, is to acknowledge reality. "We begin", say the authors, "with a government that has already decided to expand a particular business activity." Of the economists covering the bank's 189 member countries, four in five have been asked by governments to advise on industrial policies. And of the 183 countries assessed by the report, each had at least one industrial policy in place. Kenya hopes to nurture a tech industry behind a wall of subsidies. Indonesia has banned the export of many raw commodities. This makes attempts to talk policymakers out of such ideas fruitless, says one bank official. More are likely to listen if offered minimally distortive advice on how to intervene.

The trouble with this approach is that humouring today's policymakers risks emboldening them further. Few are likely to be content with public inputs. Many risk forgetting the lessons of past failures of market incentives. In the 1960s and 1970s many African countries undertook similar industrial experiments to East Asia's policies. For a time they grew at a similar pace. Yet from the mid-1970s it became apparent that policymakers in Africa had placed the wrong bets. When these blew up, this kicked off the crisis-ridden decade that eventually led the World Bank and IMF to codify the Washington Consensus.

All industrial policy favours one area of the economy over another. That is true even of public inputs: building a road helps manufacturers more than it does tech startups. No bureaucrat or economist can change that. Nor can they tell if pumping an industry full of cheap labour and investment creates efficiency or bloat. The authors acknowledge that the world has changed. But their implicit warning to policymakers remains the same: interventionism leads nowhere good. ■
