# Most Syrians in Germany are there to stay

Sending back masses of immigrants would be foolish and impossible

Eleven years ago Welat Khalil, a Syrian Kurd facing harassment and eviction from his house, took his wife and daughters from Hasaka in north-eastern Syria and fled to Germany. The family wound up in Schönberg, a small town on the Baltic coast. The first years were tough, says Mr Khalil, whose name has been changed, but "step by step, we adjusted." He now runs a restaurant with the help of his wife, and his children are thriving in school. "Germany gave us a chance, we're grateful, and I'm very proud," he says.

The Khalils' story is familiar in a country that opened its doors to over 1m Syrians fleeing a brutal civil war a decade ago. "Wir schaffen das" (We'll manage this), said Angela Merkel in a phrase that came to haunt her chancellorship. Yet she also said, "We expect that when there is peace in Syria again…you will return to your homeland with the knowledge you have gained here." Those words have begun to resonate since Bashar al-Assad's ousting in December 2024. Last week, during a press conference in Berlin with Ahmed al-Sharaa, Syria's insurgent-turned-president, Friedrich Merz, Germany's chancellor, suggested that 80% of the Syrians in Germany should return home within three years. (The two men later accused each other of concocting the figure, but Mr Merz made it public.)

That is not remotely plausible. Of the 940,000 or so Syrians who live in Germany, around 640,000 have some form of legal protection, with another 65,000 seeking asylum (adjudications were suspended after Mr Assad's fall). Although such protections are meant to be temporary, there is no way to strip them from Syrians en masse. Legally, they can be revoked only on an individual basis—and only if officials see sustained improvement in conditions in Syria, a country that experiences regular outbreaks of sectarian strife and where 90% of people live in poverty. Add appeals and the judgments required to remove residence permits, and litigating the cases would bring German courts to a standstill. It has proven difficult even to deport convicted criminals to Syria.

What about voluntary returns? The number of Syrians choosing to leave Germany is creeping up, albeit from a tiny base. Research shows that that refugees' decisions to return are driven more by conditions at home than in countries of refuge. On a visit to Syria last year Johann Wadephul, Mr Merz's foreign minister, compared the ruins he saw to Germany in 1945 and said he doubted many refugees could return. Mr Khalil, who regards Mr Sharaa as a terrorist, says he does not expect life to become safe for Kurds in Syria.

Conditions in parts of Syria have improved, and may continue to. But meanwhile Syrians in Germany are building careers and families. Mr Khalil says he struggles with the language, but his four children—one son was born in Germany—are fluent. His daughters have forgotten their lives in Syria. Almost a quarter of a million Syrians have naturalised in recent years; hundreds of thousands more will do so. Mr Khalil applied last year.

It is clearly not in the interest of an ageing country with acute labour shortages to encourage the likes of Mr Khalil to leave. A notional expulsion of Syrians would damage sectors such as health care and logistics, says Herbert Brücker, head of the migration research unit at Germany's Institute for Employment Research. True, slightly more than half of Germany's Syrians do not work. But their employment rate is growing quickly. Of working-age Syrians who arrived in 2015, preliminary figures for 2025 suggest 65% were employed and another 5% self-employed; not far off Germany's overall rate of 77%.

Recent arrivals to Germany may be more easily tempted home, though Mr Sharaa is mistrusted by minorities such as Kurds. So might some among the ranks of the naturalised, notes Victoria Rietig of the German Council on Foreign Relations. Their secure status in Germany offers a risk-free means to return home, or to engage in "circular migration" useful for both countries—as Mrs Merkel implied.

Mr Merz built his political career in part on rejecting Mrs Merkel's legacy. Diplomatic gaffes aside, it is unsurprising he should seek to reassure Germans who thought refuge for Syrians would be temporary. But even were it desirable for Germany to see vast numbers of Syrian residents leave, it is largely not in his gift. ■