# How far do the European Union's military ambitions go?

An interview with the EU's top military officer

Imagine telling a European bureaucrat from the 1990s what the European Union, conceived as a peace project, would be doing three decades hence. Warships under EU command would be zapping ballistic missiles out of the sky in the Red Sea. The bloc would train more than 86,000 Ukrainian soldiers, handing them 2m rounds of ammunition, to kill Russian invaders more efficiently. One of its bigger spending programmes would be a €150bn ($172bn) loan package for member states to buy arms. All of it would sound absurd.

The EU's "military instrument" is "at a crossroads now", says General Sean Clancy, the chairman of the EU Military Committee, speaking to The Economist from his office in Brussels. The committee advises the EU's foreign-policy chief, Kaja Kallas, and oversees military operations like Aspides, the naval mission in the Red Sea. General Clancy is the first Irish four-star general in a century. His priorities for the past year have been clamping down on Russia's shadow fleet, making it easier for military forces to move across Europe and improving drone defences.

In theory, the EU's military staff (confusingly distinct from General Clancy's military committee) is still committed to building an expeditionary corps of 50,000 to 60,000 troops. "That has become a totally paper exercise," says Sven Biscop of the Egmont Institute, a think-tank in Brussels. "Nobody believes that there will ever be this army corps." In contrast, a new 5,000-strong "rapid deployment capacity", or RDC, is more real.

General Clancy compares these to older EU battlegroups, much maligned formations which were never tested and whose troops remained in their donor countries. "We now have very proactive exercise and operational training and buildup of each RDC," he says. "It is exercising. It is trained. It is available." All 27 member states would need to agree to a deployment. But that prospect is becoming more realistic, says the general: "More and more now we're seeing the consideration of the utilisation of the RDC."

It is tempting to view these forces as an embryonic European army, one which might some day fill the vacuum left by America, which now says explicitly that it expects Europe to lead the conventional defence of the continent. In recent weeks, the mood in Europe has grown increasingly sombre, with Donald Trump and others repeatedly calling into question the future of NATO. In January Mark Rutte, the secretary-general of the alliance, derided the notion that the EU (or indeed Europe) could defend itself. "Keep on dreaming," he said, to the horror of many Europeans. "You can't." Seen from within, though, the aim looks very different.

When asked if the battlegroups could go toe-to-toe with the Russian army, General Clancy is clear that is not on the cards. "This is not about going into war," he says. "This is about sustainment [and] stabilisation." (The terms refer to less dangerous missions such as evacuation and disaster relief.) That points to a paradox. Increasingly, Europeans believe that NATO is in crisis, as America steps away from (or even turns against) its European allies. But instead of abandoning the alliance, they are clinging to it more closely. "Under this Commission," says Mr Biscop, referring to Ursula von der Leyen's tenure as president, "very quickly the consensus emerged that the EU's role would be to facilitate EU members meeting their NATO targets."

General Clancy spells out a division of labour. He says members are thinking "more and more" about Article 42(7), the EU's mutual-defence clause. On paper, it is stronger than Article Five, the older and better-known NATO equivalent. But in practice, the two organisations have distinct tasks. EU forces should operate below the Article Five threshold of major war in Europe, he says. "We don't want to blur the lines between what the EU does and what is a NATO responsibility," he stresses, pointing out that he confers frequently with NATO's top generals to avoid duplication. "I'm very clear we need to stay in that lane."

Nevertheless, the boundary between low-intensity stabilisation missions and high-intensity conflict is blurring. Take Operation Aspides, the EU-led mission to defend shipping in the Red Sea, which began in February 2024 and was extended this February. It has protected 600 ships to date, says General Clancy. French warships under its command have shot down three ballistic missiles fired by the Yemen-based Houthis, with a German ship intercepting a fourth. Naval forces have also shot down 20 drones.

But Aspides also showed the limits of EU military power. At the start of the mission the Hessen, a German frigate, accidentally shot at a high-end American drone with two expensive SM-2 interceptor missiles, which missed. Later that year the Hessen, returning from Asia, avoided the Red Sea entirely. "Overall, the deployment drove home for several navies their drastically inadequate capability in air defence, also affecting the Danish and the Belgians," says Alex Luck, a naval analyst.

There has been chatter that Aspides might play a role in re-opening the Strait of Hormuz. But Johann Wadephul, Germany's foreign minister, said the mission had been "ineffective" even at its current task; sending it into a narrow waterway under still more intense fire would be absurd. "Nothing really can happen until there is a cessation in hostilities of some form," acknowledges the general.

There is much that the EU can do short of major war, though. Many member states are sceptical of EU involvement in war-like things, but welcome its role in unifying the continent's defence industries. Europe operates a dozen different types of tank; America uses one. The EU's aim is to provide incentives for countries to buy more within the continent, and thus less from abroad, a process that involves friction with both America and with non-EU European NATO members, such as Britain, whose firms will lose out.

Military mobility is another area where the EU's superpower—regulation—has a direct impact on readiness for war. The bloc's aim is to have a "military Schengen", a reference to the EU's borderless zone, by next year, with just three days' clearance to move large military hardware across borders (a process that can currently take more than a month). The EU budget for 2028-34, which is being negotiated now and will be finalised in 2027, should involve a tenfold rise in spending on military mobility, says General Clancy. "Putin is not going to be deterred by our strategies or policies," acknowledges the general. "He will be by their implementation." ■
