# Friedrich Merz's ill-timed tussle with Donald Trump

The chancellor's reckless truth-telling means trouble for Germany

Negotiating with Donald Trump would be "very easy", Friedrich Merz told this newspaper last year, during his successful campaign to become Germany's chancellor. He would probably not say the same today. Having once aspired to be Europe's chief Trump-whisperer, Mr Merz has in the past week found himself squarely in the president's crosshairs, even as Germany confronts a partial withdrawal of American troops that risks undermining Europe's deterrence towards Russia.

The trouble began on April 27th. Mr Merz, in one of the ill-considered comments for which he is notorious, told a group of schoolchildren that America "obviously has no strategy" for its conflict in Iran and was being "humiliated" by its adversary. Mr Trump's retaliation was swift and merciless. Mr Merz should spend "more time fixing his broken Country…and less time on interfering with those that are getting rid of the Iran Nuclear threat", said the president in one of several social-media broadsides. He then vowed to withdraw some of the 39,000 American soldiers stationed on bases across Germany's south. The Pentagon proceeded to announce a plan to remove 5,000 troops over the next 6-12 months, without offering details. On May 2nd Mr Trump said that was just a start.

Some wonder if it is all bluster. Mr Trump's first-term plan to withdraw 12,000 troops from Germany was slow-rolled by a sceptical Congress and Pentagon officials, and eventually cancelled by Joe Biden. Mr Trump may see his new proposal as appropriate retaliation for an upstart who spoke out of turn. But Pentagon planners, who were reportedly blindsided by the president's announcement, know that bases like Ramstein are crucial hubs for American power projection, not least in the Middle East. (Among America's European allies, Germany was one of those that placed the least restriction on the use of its bases for the war in Iran.) On May 2nd the heads of the armed-services committees in the House and Senate, both Republicans, declared themselves "very concerned" that the troop withdrawal would send the "wrong signal to Vladimir Putin", and urged the Department of Defence to consult Congress.

The 5,000 troops to be pulled out may come from a surge in forces ordered by Mr Biden in 2022, after Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Mr Biden's administration itself had tried to withdraw those forces. Mr Trump's move may in this sense represent a return to the status quo.

But German officials are yet more concerned by a second American decision: to cancel a deal struck in 2024 between Mr Biden and Olaf Scholz, Mr Merz's predecessor, to this year station in Germany a "multi-domain task force"—a battalion armed with three intermediate-range missile systems. These include advanced hypersonic missiles which now seem destined for the Middle East instead. The aim of the deal was to narrow Europe's deterrence gap with Russia, which has installed nuclear-capable Iskander missiles in its Kaliningrad exclave. It was meant as a stopgap measure while European countries worked on their own capabilities. Germany is pouring vast sums into the Bundeswehr, and its recent military strategy acknowledges the need to build up deep-strike capabilities. But no amount of money can plug the gap in the short term.

Most important of all is the damage Mr Trump's erratic decision-making inflicts on the credibility of NATO's deterrence. "It doesn't matter whether the forces are withdrawn or not, or whether the capabilities arrive or not," says Christian Mölling, the director of European Defence in a New Age, a Berlin-based think-tank. "Deterrence is a mind game, and capabilities without political will behind them are useless."

German officials have sought to quell the storm. Mr Trump's decision was "foreseeable," said Boris Pistorius, the defence minister, adding that it was all the more reason for Europe to take more responsibility for its own defence. "We maintain close and trusting contact with our partners, including and especially in Washington," added Mr Merz. The row does at least bolster Mr Merz's case that Germany must take a more assertive role in safeguarding European security as America withdraws.

But there is no mistaking that the row arrives at a difficult time for the chancellor. As he approaches his first anniversary in the job, Mr Merz looks in a more precarious position than ever. His approval rating has fallen to just 15%. The coalition of his Christian Democrats with the Social Democrats is visibly fraying over domestic reforms. The government recently slashed its already anaemic growth forecast for 2026 by half, thanks in large part to Iran's closure of the Strait of Hormuz. Amid the tumult, the populist-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) has opened up a lead in opinion polls. In September, elections in Germany's east could see the AfD take power for the first time in a German state. With the home front this restive, the last thing Mr Merz needed was a tangle with Mr Trump. But that is what he has got. ■
