# The War Room newsletter: Is Russia being out-droned?

Shashank Joshi, our defence editor, invites a Ukrainian drone expert to write a guest edition

Welcome back to the War Room. Thank you for all of the kind words about my move to Washington, DC. I was delighted to learn that Mary in Texas reads the newsletter with her 13-year-old son, who must be the most militarily astute middle-schooler in the country. William was one of many readers who warned me of the "miserable, swamp-like" conditions awaiting me (I think he was referring to the weather). Bill sagely advised me to pay attention to developments beyond the Beltway.

The truth is that we have a simple job as journalists. We talk to a wide range of people, listen to what they have to say and then write about it. And sometimes it is worth hearing their voices directly. This week I invited Dmytro Putiata, a member of Ukraine's armed forces, to guest-write The War Room. He has remarkable experience of drone warfare, having taken part in Ukraine's Kharkiv and Kursk offensives. He currently serves in the 20th Unmanned Systems Brigade, known as K2, whose parent unit we profiled in March, and previously served in the strike-drone company of the 36th Marine Brigade.

He recently wrote with Rob Lee, a former marine and among the sharpest Ukraine-watchers, on Russian drone efforts. I asked him to explain the state of play. Russian bombardments are becoming more frequent. In April Russia launched almost 7,000 drones and missiles into Ukraine overnight, a new record. But Dmytro argues that Ukraine has drone dominance right now where it really matters and that this is causing increasingly serious problems for Russia's high command. Recently Valery Zaluzhny, Ukraine's ambassador to Britain and previously the country's commander-in-chief, repeated his claim, which he first made to The Economist, that the war was at a deadlock and that offensive manoeuvres on an operational scale—say, breaking through enemy lines and advancing more than 100km—had become impossible, because of technology. Dmytro explains candidly why he does not agree.

"For two years, from 2022 to 2024, Russian reconnaissance drones dominated the skies of Ukraine. They penetrated dozens of kilometres behind the front lines, into Ukraine's rear, which allowed Russia to find targets for ballistic missiles, loitering munitions and glide bombs. The Ukrainian army had to adapt to survive. The old ways of countering aerial threats were no longer effective; the sheer number of Russian reconnaissance drones swamped our air-defence systems.

Our response was drone-based air defence to intercept everything from reconnaissance drones to Shahed strike drones. The Ukrainian system is still far from fully effective, but it is one of the few systems in the world that works, and it significantly reduces the number of successful strikes. The Russians are further behind.

The Russian army only began implementing a system to intercept Ukrainian drones using its own drones in the second half of 2025. However, this system cannot yet be described as cohesive, but rather as isolated elements on the battlefield in Ukraine and near factories in Russia. The Russians are building a network of small radar stations. This year they are focusing their training on intercepting drones and are attempting to develop software similar to that of Ukraine—known as Skymap and Graphite—which can show radar tracks on tablet computers.

This might yield good results only by the end of the year. For now, the Russians are suffering. Over the past six months, the Ukrainian army has significantly increased the number of strikes against Russian forces at distances of 30km to 200km behind the front line. Ukraine finally has a system to allocate strike capabilities in a more intelligent way. Previously it focused on tactical targets (such as infantry at the front line) and big strategic ones (such as oil refineries). Now it is devoting more munitions for the important things in between.

Ukraine is hitting Russia's logistics, air-defence systems, radars, ammunition stores (including drones) and fuel depots. Every night strikes are carried out 80km to 120km behind the front line. This is causing the Russian army to reduce its fuel consumption and to move depots further back—in some cases into Russian territory. Russia has even imposed restrictions on the size of convoys in the Donetsk region to make them harder to detect, with only two trucks now allowed to move together.

All of this, plus Russia's continued inability to break through the front line, is forcing the country's high command to change its plans yet again. Russian generals are making unrealistic demands of their division commanders and lying about their progress. In some cases, Russia's high command claims that entire Ukrainian cities are captured, when the truth is that isolated parts of a village, or uninhabited forest, are all that has been taken.

The political leadership's desire to seize territory quickly leads to a lack of training among recruits and, as a result, a high casualty rate as small infantry groups attempt to break through the rear of the Ukrainian army. One gets the impression that the Russian army, which has finally begun to suffer defeats in the operational depth—that is, not just at the line of contact but more than 30km beyond it—has reached an impasse and is readjusting its ambitions for the next offensive. The failure to meet recruitment targets for four months running and continued heavy losses toward the end of this year could have irreversible consequences, with Russia unable to advance and forced to abandon the active phase of the war. If so, Ukrainian technology will have played a major role in this outcome.

For years the Ukrainian army, relying on its own intelligence sources and information from Western partners, has been forced to watch hundreds of Russian air-defence systems, radars, command posts, warehouses and other targets without being able to strike them. Now, for the first time since 2022, Ukrainian technology is dominating the front lines in the field of drones and anti-drone systems, including the software that controls this. There has been a significant net reduction in Russian firepower.

For the first time since 2023, when Ukraine's HIMARS launchers were last well-supplied and effective, Ukraine is capable of routinely striking Russian targets at depths of 30km to 150km, now using drones costing around $5,000. These have certain technologies on board—I will not be more specific—which enable the destruction of expensive Russian equipment. Recently Ukrainian drones struck two Russian helicopters at an airfield more than 150km from the front line.

I am convinced that in 2026, Ukraine will once again surprise the world and carry out several localised offensive operations against the Russian army. And I am convinced that they will be successful, and that there is a chance to see manoeuvre warfare again, where the aim is to break through and use speed and shock to defeat an enemy, rather than the slow-moving positional battles we have been stuck with for so long. But the Ukrainian army needs more time for reconnaissance and planning operations with a clearer division of command responsibilities than exists today. If these issues are resolved, the success of tactical operations has a chance to grow into something more. Drones do not replace manoeuvre warfare. Drones present both opportunities and threats. And we need to know how to work with them and integrate them into our systems."

Thank you to Dmytro for taking the time to write.

Elsewhere in The Economist, there were plenty of defence and security stories. We looked at Hizbullah's loss of standing in Lebanon and the "grim limbo" in Gaza, where Israel's grip is tightening rather than loosening. Iran's demand for a toll to cross the Strait of Hormuz seems to have inspired similar ideas in Indonesia, which sits astride the Strait of Malacca. That would be another serious blow to the principle of freedom of navigation. Our Telegram column looks at why Europe needs Ukraine. And we reported, no doubt hoodie-clad, from a hacker conference in Singapore, exploring the role of AI in cyber-defence.

I wanted to include a few other things I had enjoyed this week. There was this interesting debate between Seva Gunitsky, a political scientist, and Michael Kofman, an expert on Russia's armed forces, on why so many experts wrongly predicted how the war in Ukraine would unfold. War on the Rocks published an excellent essay on Xi Jinping's military purges in China and the impact they will have on the country's high command. "He has forged a hollow force too frightened to fight, yet too frightened to stand down." And CSIS, a think-tank, published a sobering assessment of how the Iran war has affected America's stockpiles. It will take four years to rebuild some stocks to pre-war levels, which were anyway low. Now America is deploying its Dark Eagle hypersonic missile to the Middle East to reach Iranian launchers. Russian and Chinese generals will be delighted.

If you missed my Inside Defence conversation with Rachel Ellehuus, the director-general of the RUSI think-tank and a former official at NATO, then you can catch up here. Find out why she thinks Europe was right to have spurned Donald Trump on Iran and what it is like to be at the heart of a NATO leaders' summit, such as the one looming in Ankara in July.

Thanks for reading and see you next week. ■
